most shapes,
patterns and textures in general are not created a single string of operations.
Usually you have to combine separate segments and
there are multiple different ways to do so.
In this section we will go over the basics of how to combine textures and mosques.
So we can apply these methods in the following chapters.
This part is highly linked to the earlier section about general value control.
The main difference is that there we were
mostly working with constant values to add or multiply
well now I want to focus on the combination
of maps that are not constant over the surface.
As a simple example,
I'm just going to create two circular gradients that are overlapping.
I create these simply by shifting the currents with a subtract node and
then using a length note to get a map of the radius.
Let's invert the map by subtracting it from one.
So we get a circle with a radius of one that
has a value of zero on the edge and one the center
for Now I will just convert these circles into mosques with a
hard edge by using a math notes set to greater than zero.
These mosques now contain no other values than zero and
one no hidden negative values and no values in between.
As you can see in the graph view,
combining these masks is now comparable to simple boolean operations.
The simplest way of getting the union of both
shapes is using a math notes set to maximum
and for the intersection. Using it set to minimum
if you want to get a mask of where they are equal or different,
you can set it to compare.
Now let's delete the great then nodes and go back to the gradient information.
You can see how, where the two textures have the same value. It creates an edge
because we are still combining it with the minimum operation.
That edge can be easily smoothed out by
just using the smooth minimum or maximum instead.
What is unique about the maximum and minimum operations is
that the textures don't affect or overlay each other.
They are simply masked out by which one is greater or lesser.
But if you do want to have the textures affect each other.
You can simply use other operations to show this part.
Let me quickly add in the noise texture as well.
When I now add the noise on top you can see that it is applied over the whole circle.
There is just one issue that the average of these values is shifted as well,
increasing the size of the circle.
The reason for that is that the noise is centered around 0.5.
As we have seen before to counter that we can simply subtract 0.5
And now that the values are centered around zero.
We can also scale the effect of the noise
by adding a multiplication with a factor here.
You can also see the immense benefit of having
the additional great information and the negative values.
If we had clamped the circle textures back here to arrange between zero and one,
the noise would just as well have affected the black areas
and of course after centering its values around zero,
clapping the noise texture makes a huge difference as well.
So using the add operation,
offsets the values with the same strength independent on the value of the
other map as the strength of the noise is the same everywhere.
If you use the multiply operation instead,
the noise effect is also scaled with the gradient map
but now having the noise centered around zero is not doing
us a favor while adding zero does not change anything.
For multiplication.
The neutral element that does not change anything is multiplying by one.
So for this we want the values to be centered around one instead of zero.
I will however still keep this setup subtracting 0.5 1st
and then multiplying by a factor to adjust the
strength and then I just add one afterwards.
Otherwise the values just fly away. Keeping a sense of the order here is important.
You can always just go through the setup step by step and look at the value graph.
If you are not sure why something does not work as you expected
now that the values are centered around one,
you can see that it has the promised effect.
The strength of the noise depends on the radiant.
That also means that the effect that the edges zero and the shape stays the same.
Another thing I want to point out here is how to use the
additional information in the negative values to soften the edge of the shape,
you can just take another map range note and
set the interpolation to smooth or even smoother step.
The benefit of the negative values is that you then
can fade out the gradient beyond the initial edge.
So usually try to keep as much information in the texture
as long as possible without doing unnecessary clamping of the values
up to this point, we have only talked about value maps, transitioning to color maps.
Most of the concepts are the same.
Just instead of a single channel,
you have to deal with three channels at the same time.
The simplest way to apply color to a value map is using the color ramp note,
You can use it to define a color gradient that is
mapped until the input values in the range from 0-1.
It supports multiple different interpolation types and it is
very intuitive to use to combine multiple column maps.
You can technically use the vector math node as the
RGB channels are treated the same way as the X,
Y Z channels
but more convenient to use And specialist for blending colors is the mix RgB note.
It blends between two column maps based on a mask factor between zero and 1.
Apart from the mixed type,
it is also a bunch of other useful blend modes
that you may be familiar with from other software.
The general behavior that is always the same
is that the factor between zero and one always
controls the influence of the second color input while
the first input is used as the basis.
I will not go over all blend modes but just as an example overlay is a very nice way of
both brightening and darkening in color with a texture that
is centered around 0.5 without blowing out whites or blacks.
You can also use the mix RGB no to process value maps
but it is a bit less efficient and you
can substitute all the operations that it supports.
Also using Math notes.
Some are very obvious like add and multiply.
I was a less obvious like overly.
I'm not going to go over them here but the
one that I want to point out is the simple mixed
mode for the values it might not be in the
name but you can simply use the map range node,
fulfill the exact same task for values as the mixed note does for colours,
you simply have to plug in the factor into the value input
and the two maps into the two men and two max inputs.
Leave the from inputs at zero and one and make sure it is still on linear
and as you can see there is no difference
that is as much as I want to say about combining and blending textures and masks.
For now,
the operation you want to use is highly depending on what you want to achieve.
So I recommend getting more familiar how different
maps combined with the individual operations that I have
shown and observing the results with the value graph
tool to see more easily what to expect.
It is generally a good tip to try and stay aware of where the map is
zero and where it is one as those two are the important levels for multiplication,
addition and some other operations,
and they are usually easy to recognize.
I will talk about how to use these methods for masking
and blending together multiple different shooters in a later chapter,
I will also be using them a lot in the examples.